Tilapia Piscidin 4 ( TP4 ) Stimulates Cell Proliferation and Wound Closure in MRSA Infected Wounds in Mice .
Antimicrobial peptides ( AMPs ) are endogenous antibiotics that directly affect microorganisms , and also have a variety of receptor mediated functions .
One such AMP , Tilapia piscidin 4 ( TP4 ) , was isolated from Nile tilapia ( Oreochromis niloticus ) ; TP4 has antibacterial effects and regulates the innate immune system .
The aim of the present study was to characterize the role of TP4 in the regulation of wound closure in mice and proliferation of a keratinocyte cell line ( HaCaT ) and fibroblast cell line ( Hs-68 ) .
In vitro , TP4 stimulated cell proliferation and activated collagen I , collagen III , and keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) gene expression in Hs-68 cells , which induces keratin production by HaCaT cells .
This effect was detectable at TP4 concentrations of 6.25 mug/mL in both cell lines .
In vivo , TP4 was found to be highly effective at combating peritonitis and wound infection caused by MRSA in mouse models , without inducing adverse behavioral effects or liver or kidney toxicity .
Taken together , our results indicate that TP4 enhances the survival rate of mice infected with the bacterial pathogen MRSA through both antimicrobial and wound closure activities mediated by epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , transforming growth factor ( TGF ) , and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) .
The peptide is likely involved in antibacterial processes and regulation of tissue homeostasis in infected wounds in mice .
Overall , these results suggest that TP4 may be suitable for development as a novel topical agent for wound dressing .
1 .
Introduction .
Antibiotic resistance is recognized as a major problem worldwide in the management of infectious disease , both in hospital settings and in the community .
Therefore , there is a clear requirement for new antibiotics , particularly those effective against multidrug resistant bacteria [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Cases of wound infection due to multidrug resistant organisms , such as methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) , continue to increase .
At the same time , there has been a decline in the development of new antibacterial therapies [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Antimicrobial peptides ( AMPs ) are endogenous antibiotics that directly target microorganisms [ XREF_BIBR ] .
In addition to host defense , they are also involved in the modulation of the immune response [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Tilapia piscidin 4 ( TP4 ) is an AMP isolated from Nile tilapia ( Oreochromis niloticus ) , and was characterized as early as 2012 .
Tilapia piscidin 4 is a 23 amino acid peptide that starts with phenylalanine ( F ) and ends with histidine ( H ) [ XREF_BIBR ] .
TP4 is a pore forming peptide with an alpha-helix structure , which confers selective cytolytic activity against bacteria .
In addition to disrupting bacterial membranes , Tilapia alpha-helix AMPs have been reported to stimulate immunogenicity , induce a TH1 cellular immune response , and act as adjuvants to vaccines in fish [ XREF_BIBR ] .
TP4 has antimicrobial activity against both Gram positive and -negative bacteria [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Furthermore , clinical case studies have shown that application of AMPs to severely infected cutaneous wounds can clear the infection and improve healing [ XREF_BIBR ] .
In addition , previous studies have confirmed that AMPs have immunomodulatory function [ XREF_BIBR ] .
A recent study reported that AMPs may promote resistance to bacterial infections by stabilizing the cytoskeleton network in host cells [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Thus , TP4 has many features consistent with antibiotics , but potentially has broader applications , and may eliminate or reduce concerns of bacterial resistance .
Cutaneous wound healing is a complex process involving blood clotting , inflammation , new tissue formation , and finally , tissue remodeling [ XREF_BIBR ] .
The inflammation process is associated with epithelial injury and with increased expression of mediatory molecules .
Some of these molecules , such as keratinocyte growth factor [ XREF_BIBR ] or epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) [ XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR ] , are involved in the regulation of epithelial repair processes .
AMPs also regulate epithelial reconstitution , while human neutrophil defensins induce airway epithelial proliferation and wound closure [ XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR ] .
Treatment with effective AMPs can both help reduce the risk of infection , and reduce the overall time required for wound healing .
Bacteria can colonize wounds within 48 h of injury , and bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and Streptococcus spp. may prolong the inflammatory phase of wound healing [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Topical or systematic application of suitable antimicrobial agents may prevent wound infection and/or accelerate wound healing .
Inflammation involves the release of biologically-active mediators , which attract macrophages and lymphocytes ; these cells secrete cytokines that stimulate epithelial proliferation , and result in the chemoattraction of epithelial cells to the wound area [ XREF_BIBR ] .
The goal of the current study was to examine the antimicrobial , anti-inflammatory , and wound healing properties of TP4 treatment in MRSA infected mice .
We investigated whether treatment of a mouse model with peptide ( AMPs ) can ( i ) enable the identification of novel candidates for antibacterial therapeutic drugs ; ( ii ) inhibit bacterial growth ; and ( iii ) accelerate wound closure .
2 .
Results .
2.1 .
In Vitro Toxicity and Stimulation of Proliferation by TP4 .
We first studied the cell toxicity of TP4 in a fibroblast cell line ( Hs-68 ) and keratinocyte cell line ( HaCaT ) using neutral red , LDH , and MTT assays ; we observed that TP4 at various concentrations up to 20 mug/mL affects cell viability in the Hs-68 line ( XREF_FIG A-C ) .
In addition , cell proliferation was significantly increased by low doses ( 2.5 ~ 10 mug/mL ) , as reflected by the change in cell viability as compared to the untreated group .
We subsequently investigated the effect of TP4 on cell proliferation factors .
Collagen and keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) are important performance factors for cell proliferation [ XREF_BIBR ] .
We thus analyzed collagen I and III , and KGF gene expression in TP4 treated Hs-68 cells .
Expression of all genes was enhanced by TP4 treatment , as compared to expression in the controls ( XREF_FIG D-F ) .
TP4 at tested concentrations ( down to 10 mug/mL ) did not affect the viability of HaCaT cells ( XREF_FIG A-C ) .
Of the proliferation and differentiation mediators in this keratinocyte cell line ( HaCaT ) , keratin 10 and 17 are of particular importance , because they play a major role in coordinating protein synthesis and cell growth mechanisms [ XREF_BIBR ] .
As shown in XREF_FIG D , TP4 significantly increased gene expression of keratin 10 , but did not affect that of keratin 17 ( XREF_FIG E ) .
Therefore , our results indicate that TP4 enhances Hs-68 and HaCaT cell proliferation , possibly through activation of the genes encoding collagen I and III , KGF , and keratin 10 .
2.2 .
Acute Toxic Effects of TP4 in Mice .
We examined the toxicity of TP4 by delivering it via intramuscular ( i.m .
) injection into mice , and subsequently measuring biochemical factors in the blood .
Mice treated with 2 mg of TP4 did not exhibit any significant changes in the levels of blood urea nitrogen ( BUN ) , creatinine ( CRE ) , total glucose ( GLU ) , or creatine phosphokinase ( CPK ) ( XREF_TABLE ) .
While glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase ( GOT ) and glutamic pyruvic transaminase ( GPT ) were significantly increased at the first day after injection , they eventually returned to normal levels ( XREF_TABLE ) .
Our results suggest that TP4 does not induce systemic toxic effects , even at the highest concentration tested ( 2 mg/mouse ) .
2.3 .
TP4 Enhances the Survival of Mice Infected with MRSA .
We proceeded to investigate the bactericidal effects of TP4 in vivo , by monitoring the survival of mice infected with MRSA prior to treatment with TP4 or antibiotic .
All untreated mice infected with MRSA died within 72 h of infection , whereas co-treatment with TP4 decreased the mortality rate ( XREF_FIG A ) .
At eight days after MRSA infection , the survival rates were 100 % , 80 % , and 0 % for mice treated with TP4 ( 0.005 mg/g ) , vancomycin ( 0.01 mg/g ) , and methicillin ( 0.01 mg/g ) , respectively .
At 48 h , the rate of lethality in the untreated and infected mice was 60 % ; treatment with TP4 or vancomycin significantly decreased the rate of mortality ( XREF_TABLE ) .
Bacteriologic evaluation revealed that untreated mice infected with either strain exhibited 100 % positive blood cultures and a high level of bacterial colonization ( with the numbers of CFU/mL being no lower than 10 6 ) for all organs tested ( XREF_TABLE ) .
TP4 treatment significantly reduced the bacterial burden in all examined organs compared to those of untreated controls ( P < 0.05 ) .
These data indicate that TP4 can efficiently control MRSA in the organs of infected mice .
To determine the curative potential , mice were first injected with MRSA and then injected with TP4 ( 0.005 mg/g ) 10 , 60 , 120 , or 180 min later .
At these injection times , the MRSA experimental groups exhibited survival rates of 100 % , 80 % , 60 % , and 50 % , respectively ( XREF_FIG B ) .
The survival rates of mice treated with TP4 were consistently greater than those of untreated mice ( PBS treated control mice ) .
These data indicate that immediate application of TP4 ( 0.005 mg/g ) is important to prevent severe infection .
Application within 10-60 min of MRSA infection enabled TP4 to act as an effective curative agent .
As such , we next investigated whether TP4 promotes wound repair .
2.4 .
Efficacy of TP4 on in Vivo Wound Closure .
First , we examined whether TP4 promotes healing of wounds made in an aseptic manner ( XREF_FIG A ) .
We did not observe any statistical difference between the areas of untreated wounds and TegadermTM or antibiotic treated wounds , with all closing by day > 25 .
This was not unexpected , as skin wounds heal efficiently in healthy mice , and it is unlikely that this process can be significantly improved .
Treatment with vancomycin resulted in a similar wound closure time to the control , while wound closure was accelerated by treatment with TP4 alone .
Such an increase in wound closure was not observed in uncontaminated wounds , suggesting that TP4 may facilitate wound recovery by combating infection .
Unlike the uncontaminated wounds , wound size was largely unchanged after one week in all treatment groups ( XREF_FIG B ) .
By 14 days , wound size in the TP4 treated group was smaller than that of the vancomycin treated group ( P < 0.05 ) ( XREF_FIG C ) .
However , both groups demonstrated full closure by the end of the 27th day .
2.5 .
TP4 Reduced Inflammatory Cytokines .
We next examined the direct antimicrobial activity of TP4 .
The ability of TP4 to modulate cytokines of mice was measured by ELISA ( XREF_FIG A-C ) .
The proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 acts as a potent modulator of innate immunity , while the chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 ( MCP-1 ) enhances the recruitment of monocytes and macrophages to tissue surrounding wounds [ XREF_BIBR ] .
We analyzed serum chemokine and cytokine levels in MRSA infected mice at three days after treatment .
MRSA infected mice were used as a positive control to confirm cytokine activation .
TP4 treatment decreased induction of IL-6 and TNF , compared to expression in the positive controls ( XREF_FIG A , B ) .
In addition , the interleukin-1 ( IL-1 ) protein is important for skin function , which enhances epidermal wound healing [ XREF_BIBR ] .
This study shows a statistically significant enhancement of IL-1 in TP4 treated wounds as compared with control wounds ( XREF_FIG C ) .
2.6 .
TP4 Alters Cell Proliferation Gene Expression Profiles in MRSA Infected Mice .
During wound healing , monocytes begin to replace neutrophils at 48 h , in order to remove wound debris ; this is followed by the proliferation phase at 72 h , during which time several growth factors are induced [ XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR ] .
Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , transforming growth factor beta ( TGF-beta ) , and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) mediate cellular proliferation , regulate differentiation , and stimulate vasculogenesis and angiogenesis , respectively [ XREF_BIBR ] .
To examine the expression profiles of cell proliferation genes in MRSA infected mice treated with TP4 , we subjected RNA , extracted from wound tissue of mice on days 1 , 3 , 7 , 14 , and 21 post-infection , to real-time RT-PCR .
TP4 treatment enhanced gene expression of EGF ( 3 days ) , TGF ( seven days ) , and VEGF ( 14 days ) as compared to expression in control and vancomycin treated mice ( XREF_FIG A , B ) .
Histological examination of biopsies from TP4 treated wounds indicated complete and architecturally normal epidermal regeneration ( XREF_FIG ) .
This study suggests that topical administration of TP4 may be useful for the promotion of wound healing .
3 .
Discussion .
A wound agent should address all aspects of healing ; it should not only promote tissue regeneration , but also induce hemostasis and limit microbial infection .
These latter two processes are critical , as failure to accomplish these immediate and early steps prevents subsequent repair .
Here , we have demonstrated that TP4 both stimulates cell proliferation and exerts antibacterial activity .
Antimicrobial peptides are classically regarded as endogenous antibiotics that provide a first line of host defense until other components of the innate immune system or adaptive immune system become active [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Increasing evidence from in vivo studies derived during the last few years indicates that host defense is indeed one of the main functions of vertebrate AMPs [ XREF_BIBR ] .
In parallel , it has become clear that AMPs may possess additional functions .
It is known that several AMPs bind to cellular receptors and induce specific cellular reactions [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Human neutrophil defensins induce lung epithelial cell proliferation and wound closure in vitro [ XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR ] .
Also , TP4 appears to be involved in the regulation of certain processes of epithelial cells .
Here , we observed that TP4 may modulate epidermal repair through control of fibroblast and keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation .
We report that the effect of TP4 on keratinocyte cell line ( HaCaT ) and fibroblast cell line ( Hs-68 ) proliferation may be mediated through activation of collagen I , collagen III , keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) , and keratin 10 gene expression .
In addition , we used a clinically relevant model ( suitable for elucidating the pathophysiology underlying the impairment of wound healing and for testing novel therapeutic agents ) to further examine the utility of TP4 .
In the current study , TP4 was demonstrated to have anti-bacterial activity in vitro , consistent with a previous report that TP4 inhibits bacterial growth [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Peptide based wound healing studies have been reported previously [ XREF_BIBR ] , and we have applied this platform to the study of TP4 .
In vivo , TP4 exhibited strong antimicrobial activity , evident within 60 min of exposure .
TP4 treatment caused a decrease in TNF and IL-6 at the site of infection on days 1 , 2 and 3 , as compared with the MRSA infection group .
Previously , it was reported that both Gram negative ( LPS ) and Gram positive ( lipoteichoic acid ) signature molecules caused up-regulation of pro inflammatory cytokines , through processes that were suppressed by cationic peptides [ XREF_BIBR ] .
The cytokine IL-1 plays a major role in innate immune activation during wound healing [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Accumulation of macrophages and lymphocytes at the wound healing site produces inflammatory responses , which are mediated by gene expression of the chemokine CXCL5 [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Although TP4 treatment caused a modest increase in IL-6 as compared to the control , this was lower than that induced by MRSA on day 1 .
The anti-inflammatory effect of TP4 may be due to contributions from several related mechanisms , including that of IL-10 [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Furthermore , TP4 reduced MRSA induced TNF at the wound site on day 1 .
Drug development efforts focusing on the regulation of the innate defense system have been limited , in part , because of the potential for inducing harmful sepsis responses [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Indeed , most antibiotics stimulate the release of bacterial pathogen associated signature molecule components [ XREF_BIBR ] , and thus contribute to the risk of damaging inflammation and sepsis .
We have identified that TP4 can direct kill pathogens and reduce inflammation caused by infection , thereby providing prophylaxis or treatment for a broad spectrum of infections , while balancing or controlling the attendant inflammatory response .
Multiple factors , including cytokines , enzymes , and growth factors , are involved in the initiation of the complex process of repair .
Recently , IL-1 has been reported to enhance epidermal wound healing [ XREF_BIBR ] .
However , whether IL-1 directly regulates wound closure is unknown .
Here , we show that IL-1 expression increases over time in MRSA infected wounds in mice .
TP4 was also observed to induce epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) , transforming growth factor ( TGF ) , and vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , which may enhance wound closure activity .
4 .
Experimental Section .
4.1 .
Bacteria , Cells , and Mice .
An MRSA strain commonly associated with human wound infections was selected to generate a polymicrobial solution [ XREF_BIBR ] .
The MRSA strain is a clinical isolate from stool obtained from Taipei City Hospital ( Heping Fuyou branch ) .
The strain was identified by routine laboratory methods and stored in 20 % ( vol and vol ) glycerol at -80 degreesC .
Tryptic Soy Broth ( TSB ) was used as the culture medium .
HaCaT human keratinocyte cell line and Hs-68 human foreskin fibroblast cell line were grown in DMEM containing 10 % ( v/v ) FBS , 0.37 % ( w/v ) NaHCO 3 , penicillin ( 100 unit/mL ) , streptomycin ( 100 mug/mL ) , 0.1 mM NEAA , and 1 mM sodium pyruvate at 37 degreesC in a humidified incubator under 5 % CO 2 and 95 % air .
The cells were harvested at ca .
90 % confluence ( ca .
10 6 cells/10-cm dish ) .
Balb/c female mice were used for the experiments .
All mice were housed in cages under specific pathogen-free conditions , and given water and standard laboratory chow ad libitum during the experiments .
All animal handing procedures were in accordance with National Taiwan Ocean University ( NTOU ) guidelines .
All procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of NTOU .
4.2 .
Peptides , Reagents , and Antibodies .
Reagents and chemicals were purchased from Sigma .
Standard laboratory powders of methicillin ( Cat .
No. 51454 ; Sigma , St. Louis , MO , USA ) and vancomycin ( Cat .
No. v2002 ; Sigma , St. Louis , MO , USA ) were used and prepared according to the guidelines of the CLSI .
Tilapia piscidin 4 ( H-FIHHIIGGLFSAGKAIHRLIRRRRR-OH ) was synthesized by GL Biochem ( Shanghai , China ) using a solid-phase procedure of Fmoc chemistry .
Crude peptides were extracted , lyophilized , and purified by reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography ( HPLC ) .
The molecular masses and purities of the purified peptides were respectively verified by mass spectroscopy and HPLC .
Synthetic peptides at > 95 % purity were reconstituted in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ; pH 7.4 ) for the experiments .
ELISA kits for Interleukin-1 ( Cat .
No. 559603 , BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) , tumor necrosis factor ( Cat .
No. 560478 , BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) , and Interleukin-6 ( Cat .
No. 555240 , BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) were used to determine cytokine levels .
Antibodies against VEGF ( Cat .
No. 550549 , BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA , USA ) were used for immunohistochemistry ( IHC ) .
4.3 .
Cell Proliferation .
Cells were cultured at a density of 5 x 10 4 cells per well in flat bottomed 96-well plates , and supplemented with various combinations of TP4 .
After 24 h , cell viability were measured with neutral red ( Cat .
No. N4638 ; Sigma , St. Louis , MO , USA ) uptake assay , Cytotoxicity Detection Kit ( LDH ) ( Cat .
No. 11644793001 ; Roche Applied Science , Indianapolis , IN , USA ) , and CellTiter 96 Aqueous One Solution ( Cat .
No. G1111 ; Promega , Madison , WI , USA ) , following the vendors ' instructions .
4.4 .
Measurement of Collagen I , Collagen III , KGF , Keratin 10 , and Keratin 17 Expression .
Total RNA was isolated from HaCaT and Hs-68 cells , and purified using a Qiagen RNeasy kit .
Reverse transcription into cDNA was performed with an iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit ( Cat .
No. 1708991 ; BIO-RAD , Hercules , CA , USA ) according to the manufacturer 's recommendations .
Real-time polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) was performed to analyze gene expression , using 0.5 mL of cDNA , 2x iQSYBR ( R ) Green Supermix ( Cat .
No. 1708882 ; BIO-RAD , Hercules , CA , USA ) , and 500 nM of forward and reverse primers against selected genes or GAPDH ( reference gene ) , according to the instructions of the manufacturer .
Quantitative PCR was performed under the following conditions : 40 cycles of 1 min at 95 degreesC , 30 s at 55 degreesC , and 1 min at 72 degreesC .
The threshold cycle number ( Ct ) was calculated with BIO-RAD software .
Relative transcript quantities were calculated using the DeltaCt method with GAPDH as the internal reference gene .
DeltaCt is the difference in the threshold cycles of messenger ( m ) RNA for selected genes relative to those of GAPDH mRNA .
Real-time PCR was performed in triplicate for each experimental group .
Primer sequences : GAPDHSenseCGCTCTCTGCTCCTCCTGTTC ( Nm_002046 ) AntisenseTTGACTCCGACCTTCACCTTCCCollagen ISenseACAGGGCGACAGAGGCATAAAG ( NM_000088 ) AntisenseCCAGGAGCACCAGCAGAGCCollagen IIISenseTCCAAAGGGTGACAAGGGTGAAC ( NM_000090 ) AntisenseAGGAGGACCAATAGGACCAGTAGGKGFSenseGCAACTGAACTTACTACGAACTG ( S81661 ) AntisenseTCATTGACCTCTTCCTATCTGTGKeratin 10SenseCTGCGTAGGGTGCTGGATGAG ( AF264085 ) AntisenseTTCCTCCTCGTGGTTCTTCTTCAGKeratin 17SenseCTGGCTGCTGATGACTTCC ( NM_000422 ) AntisenseCCTCCTCGTGGTTCTTCTTC 4.5 .
Tilapia Piscidin 4 Peptides and Bacteriostatic Analysis .
Minimum inhibitory concentration ( MIC ) antimicrobial assays were performed using standard protocols [ XREF_BIBR ] .
For MIC assessment , compounds were diluted to final concentrations of 100 , 50 , 25 , 12.5 , 6.25 , 3.125 , 1.582 , or 0.78 mug/mL .
Twenty microliters of each dilution were mixed in a microtiter plate well with 20 muL of the appropriate bacterial indicator suspension , and 160 muL of Trypticase Soy Broth ( TSB ) for MRSA , to a total volume of 200 muL .
Three replicates were examined for MRSA , compound , and concentration .
Positive controls contained water instead of compounds , and negative controls contained compounds without bacterial suspensions .
Microbial growth was automatically determined by optical density measurement at 600 nm ( Bioscreen C ; Labsystem , Helsinki , Finland ) .
Microplates ( Cat .
No. 3599 ; Corning , NY , USA ) were incubated at 37 degreesC .
Absorbance readings were taken at hourly intervals over a 24-h period , and the plates were shaken for 20 s before each measurement .
The lowest compound concentration that resulted in zero growth by the end of the experiment was taken as the MIC .
4.6 .
In Vivo Toxicity .
To determine the toxicity of TP4 , TP4 was dissolved in phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ; pH 7.4 ) and administered as intramuscular bolus injections in the left thigh ( 2 mg/mouse ) .
Each group contained 10 mice .
Controls were treated with PBS ( control ) .
Blood samples ( 0.2 mL ) were collected on days 1 , 3 , and 6 after the final injection of TP4 , and used to determine the serum levels of glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase ( GOT ) , glutamic pyruvic transaminase ( GPT ) , blood urea nitrogen ( BUN ) , creatinine ( CRE ) , total glucose ( GLU ) , and creatine phosphokinase ( CPK ) .
4.7 .
Therapeutic Use in a Mouse Model of MRSA Sepsis .
Female Balb/c mice ( 6-8 weeks old ) were injected intraperitoneally with 10 6 CFU MRSA per mouse .
Ten minutes after MRSA injection , mice were injected intraperitoneally with vancomycin ( 0.01 mg/g mouse body weight ) , methicillin ( 0.01 mg/g mouse body weight ) , or TP4 ( 0.005 mg/g mouse body weight ) .
In a second set of experiments , mice were given intraperitoneal injections of TP4 ( 0.005 mg/g mouse body weight ) at 10 , 60 , 120 , or 180 min after MRSA injection .
Survival rate and status were recorded every 24 h for up to 192 h. To examine bacterial dissemination , mice were sacrificed at 48 h after injection with antibiotics or TP4 , and the bacterial numbers in blood , peritoneum , spleen , liver , and mesenteric lymph nodes were recorded .
Colony counts from the diluted bacterial solutions were expressed relative to those at the start of treatment .
These experiments consisted of four groups , and each group contained 10 mice .
4.8 .
Mouse Models of Wound Healing .
Female Balb/c mice ( 6-8 weeks old ) were used for wound healing experiments .
All mice were housed individually to prevent fighting and further damage to the wounds , and they were provided with food and water ad libitum .
Mice were maintained on a 12 h light : dark cycle at room temperature , and acclimatized to the environment for at least a week before use in experiments .
All researchers wore caps , sterile gloves , gowns , and shoe covers when handling mice .
Hair was removed from the back of the mice by shaving , and a full thickness wound ( 1 cm in diameter ) was then created in the exposed region .
Each wound was inoculated with 50 muL of broth mix containing 10 6 CFU ( colony forming units ) of MRSA .
At 5 min after inoculation , 50 muL TP4 ( 2 mg/mL ) in a total volume of 0.1 mL were applied to the wound .
Thirty minutes after treatment , wounds were covered with Tegaderm ( 3 M , St. Paul , MN , USA ) to maintain uniformity , and to prevent the mice from removing the treatments .
Based on initial experiments , we examined the wounds at 3 , 7 , 14 , and 21 days post-injury , so as not to disturb the infection [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Such examinations captured the transitions from inflammatory to regenerative , and regenerative to resolving phases of wound healing [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Animals were subsequently euthanized by CO 2 inhalation and the wounds assessed .
Four individuals in each group were examined at each time point for each experiment .
Each wound was measured and then removed from the animal , with unwounded skin taken from the contralateral dorsum as a control .
Each biopsy was divided into six sections , with three sections being used for tensiometry and histology , and three sections for quantitative determination of microbial load .
Wound healing studies were repeated in triplicate .
4.9 .
Wound Closure Measurements and Cell Proliferation Gene Expression .
Tracings were taken immediately after injury .
For uncontaminated wounds , wound size was determined every second day .
For contaminated wounds , mice were euthanized at days 3 , 5 , or 19 , and tracings of the wound edges were made .
Wound areas were determined using the Macintosh Adobe Photoshop program , Histogram Analysis .
The percentage of wound contraction was calculated as follows : % Wound contraction = ( A 0 - A t )/A 0 x 100 , where A 0 is the original wound area , and A t is the area of wound at the time of biopsy , accordingly [ XREF_BIBR ] .
Cell proliferation gene expression was performed by real-time PCR , using the methods described in Section 4.4 above .
Primer sequences : GAPDHSenseCTCCAAGGAGTAAGAAACCC ( GU214026.1 ) AntisenseTGGAAATTGTGAGGGAGATGEGFSenseCATATGTGATGGCTACTGCT ( AF125256.1 ) AntisenseTTAATGTTCCTCAGGGAAGCTGF-betaSenseCGTGCTCTTCTTCGACAATA ( M57639 ) AntisenseAACATGAACAAACAGTCCCTVEGFSenseACCTTTGGGAAGAAGATGTC ( AB086118.1 ) AntisenseCAATAGAACCCTCGAGTGAG 4.10 .
IHC and ELISA of Cytokines .
Skin tissues were removed and fixed as previously described [ XREF_BIBR ] .
In brief , the cryosections were fixed with 4 % formaldehyde , and the tissue samples were stained with VEGF .
IHC was analyzed by three independent investigators .
Images were taken using a BX-51 microscope ( Olympus , Japan ) .
ELISA was performed as previously described [ XREF_BIBR ] .
4.11 .
Statistical Analysis .
All experiments were performed in triplicate on three biological replicates .
All data are present as mean +/- SEM .
We used two tailed Student 's t tests to determine significance between two groups .
We performed analyses of multiple groups by one-way or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest , using GraphPad Prism Version 5 .
For all statistical tests , we considered p values less than 0.05 to be statistically significant .
Groups of 10 mice were used for each treatment , and each experiment was repeated three times .
5 .
Conclusions .
The use of TP4 may complement the use of antibiotics .
Critically , TP4 is unlikely to induce resistance , is compatible with the use of antibiotics , and does not have any apparent immunotoxic effects .
Moreover , TP4 induces proliferation of epithelial cells , which may be due to altered gene expression of collagen I , collagen III , keratinocyte growth factor ( KGF ) , and keratin 10 .
In addition to its host defense function and modulatory effect on the innate immune system , TP4 may play an important role in reducing the risk of infection .
Our model is valuable for future research on the pathophysiology of wound healing , as well as for testing new therapeutics for the treatment of bacterial infection during wound healing .
