Pancreatic Insulin Producing Cells Differentiated from Human Embryonic Stem Cells Correct Hyperglycemia in SCID and NOD Mice , an Animal Model of Diabetes .
Background .
Human pancreatic islet transplantation is a prospective curative treatment for diabetes .
However , the lack of donor pancreases greatly limits this approach .
One approach to overcome the limited supply of donor pancreases is to generate functional islets from human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) , a cell line with unlimited proliferative capacity , through rapid directed differentiation .
This study investigated whether pancreatic insulin producing cells ( IPCs ) differentiated from hESCs could correct hyperglycemia in severe combined immunodeficient ( SCID )/non-obese diabetic ( NOD ) mice , an animal model of diabetes .
Methods .
We generated pancreatic IPCs from two hESC lines , YT1 and YT2 , using an optimized four-stage differentiation protocol in a chemically defined culture system .
Then , about 5-7x10 6 differentiated cells were transplanted into the epididymal fat pad of SCID and NOD mice ( n = 20 ) .
The control group were transplanted with undifferentiated hESCs ( n = 6 ) .
Graft survival and function were assessed using immunohistochemistry , and measuring serum human C-peptide and blood glucose levels .
Results .
The pancreatic IPCs were generated by the four-stage differentiation protocol using hESCs .
About 17.1 % of differentiated cells expressed insulin , as determined by flow cytometry .
These cells secreted insulin and C-peptide following glucose stimulation , similarly to adult human islets .
Most of these IPCs co-expressed mature beta cell specific markers , including human C-peptide , GLUT2 , PDX1 , insulin , and glucagon .
After implantation into the epididymal fat pad of SCID and NOD mice , the hESC derived pancreatic IPCs corrected hyperglycemia for > = 8 weeks .
None of the animals transplanted with pancreatic IPCs developed tumors during the time .
The mean survival of recipients was increased by implanted IPCs as compared to implanted undifferentiated hESCs ( P < 0.0001 ) .
Conclusions .
The results of this study confirmed that human terminally differentiated pancreatic IPCs derived from hESCs can correct hyperglycemia in SCID and NOD mice for > = 8 weeks .
Introduction .
The development of a cellular therapy for diabetes requires a renewable source of human insulin secreting cells that respond to glucose in a physiologic manner .
Mature islet transplantation has been proposed as a promising treatment for type 1 diabetes XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR .
However , an acute shortage of deceased organ donors currently limits the wider application of islet transplantation .
One approach to overcome the limited supply of donor pancreases is to generate IPCs from stem cells with high proliferative and differentiating potential XREF_BIBR .
hESCs have the potential to differentiate into specialized cells of all three primary germ-layers , including pancreatic IPCs XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR .
hESCs represent a potentially unlimited source of transplantable islet cells for treating diabetes XREF_BIBR .
For this reason , systematic and mechanistic studies are required to examine the potential for using hESCs as a stem cell based therapy for type 1 diabetes .
Several groups have reported stepwise protocols for mimicking the development of the pancreas in vivo .
D'Amour et al XREF_BIBR reported a five-stage protocol for differentiating hESCs into pancreatic hormone expressing endocrine cells that secreted insulin in response to various secretagogues but not to glucose in vitro .
Zhang et al XREF_BIBR reported a four-stage protocol for differentiating hESCs into mature IPCs that secreted insulin and C-peptide in response to glucose stimulation .
After comparing the different protocols , we chose a four-stage protocol for inducing the differentiation of hESCs into IPCs , and transplanted the cells into SCID and NOD mice to assess graft survival and function by performing immunohistochemistry , and measuring serum human C-peptide levels and blood glucose levels .
We found that these terminally differentiated cells were morphologically and functionally similar to pancreatic islets , and protected mice against streptozotocin ( STZ )-induced hyperglycemia .
Methods .
hESC culture and differentiation .
This study was approved by Ethics Committee of The Medical College of Qingdao University , China .
The hESC lines YT1 and YT2 XREF_BIBR were derived and characterized at our institute .
The hESCs were cultured in Dulbecco 's modified Eagle 's medium ( DMEM )/F12 supplemented with 20 % KnockOut serum replacement ( KSR ) and 4 ng/mL of basic fibroblast growth factor ( bFGF ) on mouse embryonic fibroblast feeders .
Colonies of hESCs were digested with 10 mg/mL collagenase IV into small clumps for differentiation .
The hESC clumps were replated on Matrigel ( BD Biosciences , Franklin Lakes , NJ , USA ; 1:50 )-coated dishes to provide coverage of 60 % .
The cells were incubated with RPMI1640 containing 0.2 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 0.5xN2 and 0.5xB27 supplemented with 100 ng/mL activin A ( R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN , USA ) and 1 muM wortmannin for 4 days .
The differentiated cells were cultured in RPMI1640 supplemented with 0.5 % FBS , 0.5 % insulin/transferrin/selenium ( ITS ) , 0.5xB27 , 2 muM retinoic acid ( RA ) ( Sigma , St. Louis , MO , USA ) , 20 ng/ml fibroblast growth factor-7 ( FGF-7 ) , and 50 ng/mL Noggin for 4 days .
The cells were then incubated for 5 days in high-glucose DMEM supplemented with 0.5 % FBS , 1 % ITS , 1xN2 , and 50 ng/mL epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) ( Sigma ) .
The cells expanded and attained confluency .
Finally , the cells were cultured in DMEM and F12 containing 1 % ITS , 10 ng/ml bFGF , 10 mM nicotinamide ( Sigma ) , 50 ng/ml exendin-4 ( Sigma ) , and 10 ng/ml bone morphogenetic protein 4 ( BMP4 ) for maturation .
All media and supplements were from Invitrogen ( Carlsbad , CA , USA ) and growth factors were from Peprotech ( Rocky Hill , NJ , USA ) , unless otherwise specified .
Immunohistochemistry .
The induced cells were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min , permeabilized for 10 min in 0.2 % Triton X-100 and phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) , and blocked with 10 % serum .
The cells were incubated with the primary antibody overnight at 4degreesC and then with the secondary antibody ( fluorescein isothiocyanate [ FITC ]-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG , Cy3 conjugated donkey anti-guinea pig IgG , or Cy3 conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG ; Millipore , Billerica , MA , USA ) for 60 min at room temperature .
The following primary antibodies were used : rabbit anti-PDX1 ( 1:1000 ; Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) , guinea pig anti-insulin ( 1:50 ; Dako , Glostrup , Denmark ) , and mouse anti-C-peptide ( 1:200 ; Linco and Millipore ) .
Images were captured with a confocal microscope ( Zeiss , Jena , Germany ) .
Immunostaining was performed in samples prepared without the primary antibody as a negative control .
The grafts retrieved from mice were preserved in Bouin 's solution for 24 h and embedded in paraffin .
Then , 5-mum-thick sections were cut and placed on slides .
Immunohistochemistry was performed as previously described XREF_BIBR .
Flow cytometry .
The induced hESCs were washed with PBS and dissociated into single-cell suspensions with 0.25 % trypsin-EDTA , and adjusted to 1x10 6 cells/mL with PBS .
The following primary and secondary antibodies were used : anti-insulin ( guinea pig IgG ; 1:500 ; Dako ) and anti-C-peptide ( mouse IgG ; 1:200 ; Linco and Millipore ) , FITC conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG , Cy3 conjugated donkey anti-guinea pig IgG , and Cy3 conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG .
After being washed , the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry .
RNA isolation and semi-quantitative RT-PCR .
Total RNA was extracted using RNAiso Plus reagent ( TaKaRa , Dalian , China ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
Then , 2 mug of total RNA was reverse transcribed with ReverTraAce ( TOYOBO , Osaka , Japan ) .
Taq polymerase ( TaKaRa , Dalian , China ) was used for PCR and the reaction conditions comprised initial denaturation at 94degreesC for 5 min , followed by an appropriate number of cycles of denaturation at 94degreesC for 30 s , annealing at 60degreesC for 30 s , and extension at 72degreesC for 30 s , and a final extension step at 72degreesC for 10 min .
The primer sequences and the length of each product are shown in XREF_TABLE .
The PCR products were separated on a 1 % ( w/v ) agarose gel , and were visualized by ethidium bromide staining with a 2 kb DNA ladder to estimate the size of the products .
Amplification of the housekeeping gene beta-actin was used as a positive control .
A negative control for amplimer contamination was done using a complete PCR reaction mix .
Measurement of insulin and C-peptide secretion by electrochemiluminescence immunoassays .
The levels of human insulin and C-peptide in culture supernatants following glucose stimulation and after ultrasonic cell lysis were measured using Elecsys 1010 insulin and C-peptide electrochemiluminescence immunoassays ( Roche , Penzberg , Germany ) .
To test whether the secretion of insulin and C-peptide from differentiated hESCs occurred in a glucose dependent manner , cells were stimulated with 5.5 , 16.7 , or 25 mM glucose .
Undifferentiated hESCs incubated in the same conditions were used as a control .
After pre-incubation with Krebs-Ringer buffer at 37degreesC for 90 min , the differentiated hESCs were incubated with Krebs-Ringer buffer containing 5.5 , 16.7 , or 25 mM glucose for 60 min at 37degreesC .
The conditioned supernatants were collected and analyzed .
The total protein content was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit ( PIERCE and Thermo Fisher Scientific , Inc ., Rockford , IL , USA ) .
STZ induced diabetic mice .
Male SCID and NOD mice aged 6-8 weeks were obtained from Vital River Laboratories , ( Beijing , China ) were used in this study .
The mice were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions in an animal facility with controlled humidity ( 55 % +/-5% ) , light ( 12/12 h light and dark ) , and temperature ( 22degreesC +/-1degreesC ) .
The air in the facility was passed through a HEPA filter system designed to exclude bacteria and viruses .
Animals were fed with ad libitum access to a standard irradiated diet .
The experimental protocols and animal care procedures were approved by the Ethics Review Board of Qingdao University Medical College .
To induce experimental diabetes , 70 mg/kg STZ ( in 0.1 M citrate buffer , pH 4.5 ) was injected intraperitoneally to mice every day .
Four days after STZ injection , we started measuring blood glucose levels every day using tail vein blood with a glucose meter ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ) .
The mean blood glucose of mice was 6.3 +/-2.1 mmol/L before STZ injection .
At 1-5 days after STZ administration , all STZ treated mice exhibited hyperglycemia , with mean blood glucose levels of 9.2 +/-3.6 , 13.6 +/-5.9 , 16.9 +/-6.4 , 23.9 +/-6.8 , and 24.6 +/-10.3 mmol/L , on days 1-5 , respectively .
Three days after STZ treatment , the mean blood glucose levels exceeded 16.7 mmol/L in all mice .
Once the blood glucose levels stabilized and exceeded 16.7 mmol/L for > = 3 consecutive days after STZ administration , they were considered diabetic .
These diabetic mice were then injected with long acting insulin every day until transplantation .
The unsuccessful induced diabetic mice were excluded from the study .
Mice were monitored for body weight and blood glucose levels every day or weekly .
Graft preparation and transplantation .
Confluent differentiated cells were detached from the culture plates and were cut into appropriately sized cell clusters using a cell scraper .
The aggregates were centrifuged , and the pellet was resuspended in media to a final volume of 500 muL .
Before surgery , the mice were anesthetized by using Nembutal ( intraperitoneal injection , 50 mg/kg ) .
We transplanted the differentiated hESCs into the epididymal fat pads of male SCID and NOD mice as previously described XREF_BIBR .
A total of 20 mice were transplanted with hESC derived IPCs , and 6 mice were transplanted with undifferentiated hESCs .
Mice were euthanized using carbon dioxide when deemed unhealthy .
Each mouse received 5-7x10 6 hESCs .
After recovery , the buprenorphine was injected subcutaneously at a dosage of 0.75 mg/kg to relive pain .
Eight hours later , the buprenorphine was injected repeatedly .
Engrafted epididymal fat pads were fixed in Bouin 's solution .
After 8 weeks of transplantation , the experimental mice were sacrificed with carbon dioxide and then the grafts from experimental mice were collected and analyzed .
C-peptide measurement in serum .
Graft survival was assessed by serum measurements of human C-peptide levels .
C-peptide was measured using electrochemiluminescence immunoassays ( Roche , Penzberg , Germany ) .
The assay was performed as described by the manufacturer .
Histological analysis of graft development in vivo .
To assess the differentiation potential of the hESCs , we grafted the differentiated cells into the epididymal fat pad of 20 SCID and NOD mice .
Aggregates of 5-7x10 6 cells were deposited onto a Gelfoam sponge and overlaid with Matrigel .
Mice were anaesthetized with inhalable isofluance and the prepared grafts were implanted into the epididymal fat pad in each male SCID and NOD mouse .
All mice were treated with oral enrofloxacin ( Bayer Animal Health ) for 1 week ( 100 mug/mL in drinking water ) after implantation .
Eight weeks after implantation , the grafts were retrieved from the epididymal fat pad and subjected to immunohistological analysis .
Statistical analysis .
The percentages of insulin- or C-peptide-positive cells were assessed in three independent experiments .
Cells were also stained with 4 ' ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole to estimate the total number of cells .
All data are presented as the mean +/- standard error unless otherwise stated .
Results were analyzed by unpaired t-tests and one-way analysis of variance to detect significant differences among groups .
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and the log-rank test were used to assess survival of SCID and NOD mice .
Values of P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant .
Statistical tests were performed using SPSS software ( SPSS Inc ., Chicago , IL , USA ) .
Results .
Pancreatic differentiation of hESCs .
Inverted microscopy confirmed that the undifferentiated hESCs proliferated through clonal growth .
The hESCs were then cultured using a four-stage in vitro differentiation protocol XREF_BIBR with some modifications ( XREF_FIG ) .
Initially , the hESCs were induced to form definitive endodermal cells .
Then , the cells were differentiated into pancreatic endodermal cells , and finally to insulin producing cells .
Adherent cultures were differentiated under feeder-free conditions in the absence of FBS .
The hESC colonies were plated on 1 % Matrigel for 3 days in medium .
On Day 8 of culture , the cells began to bounce back and were characterized by a smaller volume with circular shapes .
Immunohistochemistry analysis .
As shown in XREF_FIG , immunohistochemistry confirmed that the differentiated hESCs expressed pancreatic markers , including insulin , glucagon , PDX-1 , and C-peptide .
RT-PCR analysis .
RT-PCR analyses confirmed that the differentiated hESCs expressed Pdx1 , Insulin-1 , Hnf4alpha , Isl-1 , Glut2 , and Nkx6-1 ( XREF_FIG ) .
Flow cytometry .
The percentages of cells expressing human C-peptide and insulin were determined on Days 1 , 12 , and 22 by flow cytometry .
On day 1 , 0.4 % of the cells were positive for insulin and C-peptide .
After 12 day 's induction , 7.1 % and 2.0 % of the cells were positive for insulin and C-peptide , respectively .
On Day 22 , > 17.1 % and > 3.8 % of differentiated hESCs were positive for insulin and C-peptide , respectively ( XREF_FIG ) .
Secretion of C-peptide and insulin from differentiated hESCs .
Insulin could not be detected in the supernatant of cells after stage 1 of the differentiation protocol .
However , hESCs at stages 2 and 3 of induction are capable of secreting insulin .
Mature cells obtained after stage 4 ( 10 5 cells and well ) were preincubated with Krebs-Ringer buffer containing 5.5 , 16.7 , or 25 mM glucose for 60 min at 37degreesC ; the insulin levels in the supernatant of these batches of cells were 112.8 +/-30.6 , 176.6 +/-40.6 , and 185.0 +/-43.7 muU/L , respectively .
C-peptide secretion were ( 8.6 +/-2.7 ) ng/mL , ( 12.3 +/-4.9 ) ng/mL , ( 15.6 +/-4.9 ) ng/mL , respectively .
Transplantation of pancreatic cells into the epididymal fat pads of diabetic mice .
To further characterize the development of hESCs in vivo , about 5-7x10 6 cells after stage 4 of differentiation were implanted into the epididymal fat pad in diabetic mice ( XREF_FIG ) .
Before implantation , the mean blood glucose level was 26.4 +/-5.6 mmol/L .
Three days after implantation , the blood glucose level decreased to 16.4 +/-4.3 mmol/L .
The blood glucose levels measured at 1-8 weeks after transplantation were 9.2 +/-3.6 , 8.2 +/-3.2 , 6.9 +/-2.9 , 7.0 +/-3.2 , 7.1 +/-2.8 , 7.6 +/-2.6 , 7.8 +/-3.1 , and 7.9 +/-3.1 mmol/L , respectively ( XREF_FIG ) .
To assess the implanted cell survival , human serum C-peptide on 21 , 42 , and 56 days following transplantation of differentiated cells and undifferentiated cells ( XREF_FIG ) .
Of 20 mice transplanted with hESC derived IPCs , six were found dead during 50 days follow-up period , and three were euthanized due to illness before or after 42 days post-transplant , respectively .
The remaining 11 mice were euthanized for analysis at 56 days .
As control group , 6 mice transplanted with undifferentiated hESCs , four mice were found dead in the course of the follow-up and two were euthanized due to illness .
As compared to the IPCs group in which 56 days was the final euthanization point , none of these mice survived beyond 40 days .
A Kaplan-Meier survival cure ( XREF_FIG ) using the log-rank test indicates a significant difference of P < 0.0001 between the two groups of experimental mice .
Notice that the KM curve for IPCs group is consistently higher than the KM curve for uhESCs group .
These figures indicated that IPCs group has better survival prognosis than uhESCs group .
Histological analysis of graft development in vivo .
In particular , tumor formation may be a problem associated with the graft of differentiated ESCs .
While no terotomas or tumors were identified in these animals by gross or histological examination in our study .
To assess the differentiation potential of the hESC derived cells , we grafted the differentiated cells into the epididymal fat pads of 20 SCID and NOD mice .
Aggregates of 5-7x10 6 cells were deposited onto a Gelfoam sponge coated with Matrigel , and were then implanted into the epididymal fat pad in each mouse .
Eight weeks after implantation , the grafts were removed and examined ( XREF_FIG ) .
Discussion .
Fetal pancreatic development is an extremely complex process .
In recent years , numerous research groups have generated insulin producing cells in vitro using stepwise differentiation protocols that mimic the pancreatic development in vivo .
To further optimize the pancreatic differentiation process , we compared the five-stage XREF_BIBR and four-stage XREF_BIBR induction protocols in preliminary studies .
These studies revealed that the four-stage differentiation protocol , as used in the present study , is an optimized version of our previously reported method .
The five-stage induction protocol used to differentiate hESCs into pancreatic hormone expressing endocrine cells is a sequential process involving the development of definitive endodermal cells , primitive gut tube cells , posterior foregut cells , pancreatic endodermal cells , endocrine precursor cells , and ultimately insulin secreting cells .
The insulin content of the terminally differentiated mature pancreatic cells was lower than that of primary adult human islet cells , and the differentiated cells had an equivalent function to that of the fetal pancreas .
Moreover , the differentiated cells were not glucose responsive .
Flow cytometry revealed that only 7.3 % of cells derived from the five-stage protocol were positive for insulin XREF_BIBR .
Using differentiated hESCs via the four-stage induction protocol in this report , 17.1 % of cells were positive for insulin , as determined by flow cytometry .
The differentiated cells expressed insulin , glucagon , C-peptide , and GLUT-2 , characteristic of mature endocrine cells .
The differentiated hESCs also coexpressed C-peptide and PDX-1 , a marker of mature islet cells .
The hESC derived cells were glucose responsive and expressed C-peptide .
When transplanted into the epididymal fat pads of SCID and NOD mice , the differentiated cells could reverse hyperglycemia for > = 8 weeks .
Our results indicated that the hESC derived mature pancreatic islet cells were functional in diabetic mice , and that the cells were functionally mature .
RT-PCR confirmed that the pancreatic progenitors derived from hESCs expressed of Gapd , Sox17 and Hnf4alpha , suggesting that the hESCs are of a pancreatic specification .
Flow cytometry revealed that only 8.1 % of the cells were positive for insulin and 2.0 % were positive for C-peptide , indicating that the pancreatic precursors did not fully mature .
Kroon et al XREF_BIBR reported that transplantation of hESC derived pancreatic endodermal cells into SCID and NOD mice gave rise to glucose sensitive insulin secreting cells and were capable of correcting hyperglycemia , suggesting that exposure to high glucose levels in vivo could enhance the maturation of pancreatic precursors .
In this investigation , the differentiated hESCs expressed Pdx1 , Insulin-1 , Hnf4alpha , Glut2 , and Nkx6-1 , which suggests that the cells were functionally mature XREF_BIBR .
The co-expression of insulin , PDX1 and other key transcription factors , such as NKX6-1 , is considered to be a specific functional characteristic of mature beta cells XREF_BIBR , which has previously been reported only in islet beta cells in vivo to our knowledge .
Within 7 days of engraftment , blood glucose levels were significantly lower in diabetic mice that received the graft than in untreated diabetic controls .
The differentiated hESCs also reverted hyperglycemia in the diabetic mice for > = 8 weeks , which indicates that the in vitro differentiation protocol could generate fully mature pancreatic islet cells .
EGF and its receptor are expressed throughout fetal pancreatic development , and the pancreas cannot develop following knockout of the EGF receptor .
EGF is a key growth factor that stimulates the proliferation of fibroblasts , epithelial cells , and other cells .
Co-administration of EGF and gastrin was reported to stimulate beta cell regeneration in STZ induced diabetic mice XREF_BIBR .
In our previous reports , we found that EGF can promote the differentiation of fetal bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells XREF_BIBR and fetal pancreatic stem cells XREF_BIBR into islet cells .
In this study , EGF stimulated the proliferation of pancreatic progenitor cells .
EGF and EGF receptor expression levels are lower in diabetic animals than in non diabetic animals .
EGF levels are also closely related to insulin secretion .
Further research focusing on EGF and its receptor will reveal new options for cell replacement therapy for diabetes .
Islet transplantation and stem cell transplantation represent new fields of replacement therapy for type 1 diabetes .
However , the inadequate numbers of donor pancreases prevents wider application of such therapies XREF_BIBR .
Using xeno-islet isolation , the proliferation of IPCs in vitro and stem cell derived pancreatic cell lines could make up for the shortage of donor islets .
ESCs have an unlimited self-renewal capacity and the potential to differentiate into any cell type XREF_BIBR , XREF_BIBR , offering a new direction for the treatment of type 1 diabetes .
Therefore , they retain some characteristics of tumor cells , including an unlimited proliferation potential , clonal growth , scarce inhibitory factors , and the ability to form teratomas .
In this research , no teratoma were detected .
However , the following are reasons that argue against this possibility : 1 ) The number of ES implanted mice was limited ; 2 ) Implantation time was short.We have completed bioinformatic studies of cancer associated proteins XREF_BIBR and have started studies to determine the associations of ESCs and tumors .
Stem cells ( SCs ) possess immunological and regenerative properties that could be harnessed to improve the treatment of type 1 diabetes ( T1D ) .
Furthermore , SC derived insulin producing cells are capable of engrafting and reversing hyperglycemia in mice XREF_BIBR .
Various stem cells have advantages and disadvantages .
In addition to ESC derived insulin producing cells , congenic mesenchymal stem cells have been shown to reverse hyperglycemia in diabetic nonobese diabetic ( NOD ) mice XREF_BIBR .
Cord blood stem cells ( CB-SCs ) have displayed immunodulatory and anti-inflammatory capabilities in vitro .
CB-SCs expanded in vitro showed the lowest immunogenicity rate together with immunomodulatory effect XREF_BIBR .
In the future , we will conduct further screening studies to identify proteins associated with the oncogenicity of ESCs to understand the underlying mechanisms and perform comprehensive basic research before ESCs can enter preclinical trials .
To ensure the efficacy and safety of transplantation , further studies should focus on the methods to generate IPCs comparable of natural beta-cells phenotypically and functionally .
Although cell replacement therapy for diabetes is still experimental and there is likely to be a long journey before ESCs can be used clinically for treating diabetes , stem cell transplantation represents a new direction of research for the treatment of diabetes , and has great prospects in terms of clinical application and academic research .
